In the previous video, we installed
Python 3.6 onto this Mac computer.
Now we're going to have a quick look at idle.
Now when developing software in any
programming language and integrated
development environment or IDE makes a
lot a lot easier for developers and
that's because it allows you to enter,
compile and run your programs without
having to actually leave the editor and
basically you can avoid using the
command-line from a lot of programming
and it just makes things a lot easier.
Now Python provides a very simple IDE
called idle, which we installed in the
previous video. Now the name idle was a
homage to Eric Idle one of the members
of the comedy group Monty Python.
Now idle wood interfaces directly with the
Python interpreter. Now for a number of
reasons that will become apparent as we
progress through the course, we suggest
using IntelliJ IDEA
or pycharm instead of idle and in fact
in the next video, I'm going to be
showing you how to go about installing
it but if you prefer to stick with idle
for any reason or if you have to access
idle it can sometimes be very useful.
So consequently in this video, we're going
to show you how to use the basics of
idle. Now this probably going to assume
that you've installed Python 3.6 as
shown in the last video, so you want to
start idle 3 either by the command space
trick and type of idle, you can also type
idle 3 the terminal window.
Alternatively you can open up your
applications folder as I've done here
and I can go into the python sub folder
that was created with the install video
and I can just double click idle that
way, either way you want to start up idle
and I'm just going to bring this up,
centered a little bit and just size it
up, so we can see what we're doing.
Now note that two Mac systems also have
Python 2.7 installed and I talked about
that previously so you do want to make
sure that you're running idle three and
not idle and as you can see now that
I've started I've idle has Python three
point six point two, so I know that I'm
running the right version. Now the other
thing that might happen is you might get
a message saying warning the version of
tcl/tk in use may be unstable and you
can see that I've actually got this here
the version of tcl/tk 8.59 in use may be
unstable. If your version is showing
eight point five point nine as mine is
currently showing, you can ignore that
warning and the site here linked to that
message suggests 8.59 as an alternative
and then in flags eight point five point
seven, it's not recommended so in other
words, you can just ignore that and what
we can do is just press enter on our
keyboard, we get the idle prompt to
appear now and we can actually use it as
per normal and I don't have a Mac that shows
older version, but if your
message does indicate you have tcl
version eight point five point seven
then visit that link to download one of
the stable versions that they suggest.
Alright, so once I idle ws running anything
you type will be passed to the Python
interpreter and the results displayed on
the screen. Now, ordinarily in a program
you need to use the print statement to
display a result and you'll learn more
about that in later videos in this
course, but you don't know if you need to
do that in the idle shell and to show
you that we can just click into here we
can type two plus four and press
enter now, you can see we immediately get
the answer of six. Alright, so I'm going
to type in a bit of code here now.
Now it's important to not worry too much
about exactly what this code means,
you really don't need to understand it at
this stage and that's because I'm just
showing you how idle works in the later
videos, if you're learning the syntax of
Python, this video is demonstrating idle
not explaining the Python language at
this stage. Now in the course examples,
you'll often have to enter code blocks
and that blocks of code spanning several
lines. Now idle knows when you're going
to type such a block and won't
immediately execute anything until you
finish the block and you know generally
when it's expecting more text because
the chevrons appearing you can see
that's the case right now under the six
and three chevrons or three greater than
signs, so python clearly knows that you
finish but if we start typing some code
enough for space i space in space range
parentheses ten closing parentheses
they're going to press a colon or type
of colon now and press enter, this is
what I mean about idle knowing that
you've got more text to type in now,
because the chevron's aren't showing and
the codes also been indented and
incident in the colon at the end of
the line is very important and that's
the reason that tells python in this
case, that two more information is
expected in the code block.
So remember then I'll type in print
left parenthesis, i right
parentheses, I'm going to press enter
again, but this time we've now finished a
code, so I'm now going to press the
backspace button. Once I do that, we go
back to the left hand side there that
tells idle that we've finished the code
blocks and then when we press enter
again, it's going to actually execute the
cod, so I'm going to do that and you can
see the code got executed on the screen.
So what this does is for each
element in the range it's printing out
the value, so in other words you can see
on the screen there we've got the values
0 through 9 printed out. Now again don't
worry too much about understanding the
code, you don't need to understand the
code at this stage what you can see is
that idle has some basic capabilities to
run Python code then this is not very
useful for checking simple instructions,
but editing what you've typed isn't very
intuitive in idle, so let's just say we
wanted to change the number 10 to 11.
What we can do is we can move our cursor
up to that line, up here and we can press
enter and that copies the line down
below as you can see and then we can
actually then move the cursor up and
move it over, delete the 0 and make it a 1,
and if I go down to the second line with
a down arrow key press enter and press
backspace, we're back up the stage now
where we can execute the program and I
can press enter again now and you can
see that's now went through and printed
out the numbers this time from 0 through
10 and that's because we change the
number 10 to a number 11. So that's one
way of executing code in idle and it can
be useful if you just want to check out
a bit of code. However you often want to
save programs in a separate file and run
them from there, so from the file menu
click on new file, I'll just bring this over
and let's just type into that new file
print left parenthesis double quote
hello world then another double quote
and then a right parenthesis then press
enter to go to the second line, so we
can now run what we've typed in by
coming up here to the run window and
clicking on run module or selecting run
module, alternatively we can just press
the f5 button, so I'll do that now press f5
in my case it says source code must
be saved, ok to save I'm going to click
on ok to save it and what I'm going to
do save this to my desktop and I'm just
going to call this one hello world so
you can see what happened firstly it
actually saved it and you can see the
file down on my desktop, but secondly you
can see that it executed the program as
well I'm getting the hello world output
on the bottom of the screen.
Now again, I would recommend that you use
IntelliJ IDEA instead of idle
because idle is really basic and doesn't
provide any hints, code checking or all
the other great features of a full IDE
like IntelliJ, but if you want to stick
with idle though, this brief introduction
should have got you started.
Now installing IntelliJ IDEA that will be
covered in the next video, so I just want
to give you a few reasons why you're
consider using that rather than using
idle firstly code checking as you type
IntelliJ IDEA checks the code as you
type it and actually flags errors with a
marker in the right margin and it also
suggests improvements in both the style
of your code as well as the content.
Now this is incredibly useful as you find
especially when starting out with the
new language, it also has auto completion
which works across the there is Python
libraries to provide rapid selection of
the methods or functions and hints on
the syntax and idle unfortunately only
copes with the core functionality
IntelliJ IDEA is also got auto indenting,
it also allows editing of xml and text
files, so the same tool can be used to
extend to examine data, it's got
excellent refactoring tools, it's got an
integrated part of debugger, support for
the django and google app engine
projects it also supports many languages
in addition to python such as java
scala, perl, groovy as well as many
frameworks, so that you only really need
to learn one IDE for all development and
also keep in mind that google's android
studio which is for android development
is basically IntelliJ IDEA under the
hood. So although I'm going to be using
IntelliJ IDEA in this course, you can use
your favorite IDE instead if you prefer.
So if you're already using something
like eclipse or pycharm or one of the
many other Python IDE's then by
all means carry on using them. Alright so
what I'm going to do now is finish by
running a short program that we've
created to demonstrate some of the power
of the Python language, so this program
is going to collect real-time exchange
rate data from the internet and then
produce a graph showing three currencies
for the last 12 months. Now the complete
programs less than 100 lines of code
which i think is pretty impressive for
what it's doing. Now I strongly recommend
that you type in the code while watching
videos in this course, I can't really
stress that enough, typing in code rather
than just watching me type it really
does help you to learn faster and
consolidate what you're doing and that
really is important and without going
into a lot of Education Theory, you'll
retain about 80% of things you do
compared to about 30% of the things you
just see, if that doesn't persuade you
I'll actually add that we learned by
typing in code, back when Jean Paul and
myself was starting up programming we
didn't have the internet back then so we
just copied the code from magazines and
books and the act of typing in really
makes you focus on each word that you're
typing and correcting the typing errors
afterwards really does help you learn
what's going on and it also recommended
you watch each video again after you've
typed the code, so you can focus on the
explanation of what it's doing but with
that said this next bits an exception to
that and that's because the code that
I'm about to show you is quite complex.
Now we produced this program to show you
the power of Python and there's a lot of
things in the code that won't make sense
at this moment and the program uses
functions, generators external modules
and things like lists and tuples, by the
time you finish the course, you'll
understand what all those things are and
more importantly how to use them in your
own programs, in fact you'll understand a
lot more than that, but now though relax and run
the program they're going to fuel for
what you can do with Python. Now I'm
going to actually show you how to
download this program from the internet
so we're going to open up a browser even
get to learn programming dot academy forward slash
py download or one words of html learn
programming academy slash py download html
as in to there, we get this web page
pop-up and we just need to come
over here as it says right click then
I'm going to click on save link as,
we want to save the path and files and you
can see that it's a Python the script
down the bottom there and it's going
it's wanting to save that somewhere, so I'm
going to never get to my desktop and
save it in there, you can see down the
bottom left hand corner it's now finished.
So I'm going to close down the browser,
any very small file to mention to the
700 lines of code. Alright, so remembering
where you've downloaded that we need to
switch back to idle which you can see
I'm in there now. Now from the file menu,
click on Python file I'm going to click
on open this time, I'm going to navigate
to my desktop folder again I'm going to
select exchange underscore chart dot pu
which was the file that is downloaded,
click on open and we'll move this
code over here, this is the code that I
was talking about, it is a bit complex
and certainly not anything you need to
understand right now, but you will be
learning this as we go through the
course and what we're going to do is
we're going to run it and again
we can run a python script by clicking
on run, run module or in this case
pressing the f5, I will select them on
the menu option this time, so selected
run in a moment just move this over here
to the middle and this is actually
downloading the current exchange rates
in real time and then generating a graph
and you can see that's now complete,
so getting a chart now showing the exchange
rates for Australian dollars, Great
Britain pounds and the Euro against the
US dollar. Now the program displays the
data for the last 12 months, so you'll
get different month showing along the
x-axis depending on when you're actually
running this, you can see that this video
is being recorded in August 2017,
so that's the most current month but this
will change depending on when you're
running this and I think you'd probably
agree that that's pretty impressive to
be able to have all that functionality
packed into less than 100 lines of
in fact I think it's 95 lines,
there's the code there and confirming that
I'm not going to explain how that code
works at the moment because it uses a
lot of parts and features but everything
it does will be explained in this course,
so it will all simply make sense as you
work through these videos. Alright so
that's a brief tour of idle, in the next
video, we're going to install and
configure another IDE which we've talked
about IntelliJ IDEA and I'm also going
to talk about downloading pycharm
instead if you prefer and that's because
it looks exactly the same as I did but
only supports Python programming,
as said though if you're already using an IDE.